Collision Prevention Update (#3364)
PX4/PX4-user_guide: en/computer_vision/collision_prevention.md

# Collision Prevention

_Collision Prevention_ may be used to automatically slow and stop a vehicle before it can crash into an obstacle.

> It can be enabled for multicopter vehicles when using acceleration-based [Position mode](../flight_modes_mc/position.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It can be enabled for multicopter vehicles when using acceleration-based [Position mode](../flight_modes_mc/position.md) (or VTOL vehicles in MC mode).
```

If multiple sources supply data for the _same_ orientation, the system uses the data that reports the smallest distance to an object.
:::

> The vehicle restricts the current velocity in order to slow down as it gets closer to obstacles and adapts the acceleration setpoint as to disallow collision trajectories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The vehicle restricts the current velocity in order to slow down as it gets closer to obstacles and adapts the acceleration setpoint in order to disallow collision trajectories.
```

> The vehicle restricts the current velocity in order to slow down as it gets closer to obstacles and adapts the acceleration setpoint in order to disallow collision trajectories.

Reviewer: The first bit makes sense to me - you're approaching a wall, so the vehicle reduces the velocity such that you stop before you hit it. 

FMI, what does "adapts the accel. setpoint to disallow collision trajectories" mean?

Assume I'm heading towards a wall at a 45 degree angle, does this mean? I.e. I'm guessing it might mean that the setpoint is adjusted such that you curve into the wall and then move alongside it. Some images showing the behaviour might be nice.

Reviewer: Also youtube the video to the PX4 account and include that in the docs too

Author: yea, some figures might actually help, but for that i first need feedback on my PR from Mathias, as its not yet set in stone how the compensation works.
Regarding "adapts the accel. setpoint to disallow collision trajectories", see comment below.

Reviewer: Note, would still be good to get a video.

This velocity restriction takes into account both the inner velocity loop tuned by [MPC_XY_P](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#MPC_XY_P), as well as the [jerk-optimal velocity controller](../config_mc/mc_jerk_limited_type_trajectory.md) via [MPC_JERK_MAX](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#MPC_JERK_MAX) and [MPC_ACC_HOR](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#MPC_ACC_HOR).
The velocity is restricted such that the vehicle will stop in time to maintain the distance specified in [CP_DIST](#CP_DIST).
The range of the sensors for each sector is also taken into account, limiting the velocity via the same mechanism.

> the restricted velocity is then transformed into an acceleration with [MPC_XY_VEL_P_ACC](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#MPC_XY_VEL_P_ACC) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the restricted velocity is then transformed into an acceleration with [MPC_XY_VEL_P_ACC](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#MPC_XY_VEL_P_ACC).
```

> the restricted velocity is then transformed into an acceleration with [MPC_XY_VEL_P_ACC](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#MPC_XY_VEL_P_ACC).

Reviewer: FWIW as above, I don't really understand what this means. I think that perhaps we're always controlling the acceleration setpoint, so for our controller, so what this says is that we've worked out what our restricted velocity is supposed to be, and this converts it to the value that we need for our accel. setpoint?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The restricted velocity is then transformed into an acceleration with [MPC_XY_VEL_P_ACC](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#MPC_XY_VEL_P_ACC).
```

Author: Yea, its a bit complicated. which is also why the rewrite has not been done before.
we have our velocity and acceleration setpoint coming from the operator. and the problem is that they can point into different directions. so we need to compensate the current velocity if its heading into an obstacle, and restrict the acceleration setpoint from the operator.
the current approach worked fine with velocities. which is why i take the constrained velocity with the old approach, subtract the current velocity to get a velocity error, and  just add the proportional gain of the acceleration controller (the input to whom is an velocity error). you can kind of think of the gain as something which modifies the units, input is [m/s] output is [m/s²]. (in an abstract sense)

and for the setpoint of the operator, i just scale it in regard of the distance to the minimum distance. the closer the vehicle is to the minimum distance, the more the normal component gets scaled to zero.

::: info
If there is no sensor data in a particular direction, velocity in that direction is restricted to 0 (preventing the vehicle from crashing into unseen objects).
If you wish to move freely into directions without sensor coverage, this can be enabled by setting [CP_GO_NO_DATA](#CP_GO_NO_DATA) to 1.
:::

> The delay assoctiated with collision prevention, both in the vehicle tracking velocity setpoints and in receiving sensor data from external sources, is conservatively estimated via the [CP_DELAY](#CP_DELAY) parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The delay associated with collision prevention, both in the vehicle tracking velocity setpoints and in receiving sensor data from external sources, is conservatively estimated via the [CP_DELAY](#CP_DELAY) parameter.
```

The system may work well at significantly higher speeds and lower frequency distance updates.
:::

> The tested companion software is the _local_planner_ from the [PX4/PX4-Avoidance](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Avoidance) repo, which is not actively maintained anymore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tested companion software is the _local_planner_ from the [PX4/PX4-Avoidance](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Avoidance) repo.
This repository is archived/no longer maintained.
```

:::

> The tested companion software is the _local_planner_ from the [PX4/PX4-Avoidance](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Avoidance) repo.

Author: @hamishwillee should we even mention Avoidance? As it's no longer maintained, it might not be sensible to mention it.

Reviewer: Nope. Fixed.

Next, adjust the relevant parameters to the appropriate values and add arbitrary obstacles to your simulation world to test the collision prevention functionality.

The diagram below shows a simulation of collision prevention as viewed in Gazebo.

![RViz image of collision detection using the x500_lidar_2d model in Gazebo](../../assets/simulation/gazebo/vehicles/x500_lidar_2d_viz.png)

## Sensor Data Overview (Implementation Details)

> 

Reviewer: FYI, reorganized this to state more clearly what we do first, then how the rangefinder/obstacle/companion cases differ.

New sensor data is compared to the existing map, and used to update any sections that has changed.

The angles in the `obstacle_distance` topic are defined as follows:

![Obstacle_Distance Angles](../../assets/computer_vision/collision_prevention/obstacle_distance_def.svg)

The data from rangefinders, rotary lidars, or companion computers, is processed differently, as described below.

### Rotary Lidars

Rotary Lidars add their data directly to the [`obstacle_distance`](../msg_docs/ObstacleDistance.md) uORB topic.

### Rangefinders

Rangefinders publish their data to the [`distance_sensor`](../msg_docs/DistanceSensor.md) uORB topic.

This data is then mapped onto the `obstacle_distance` topic.
All sectors which have any overlap with the orientation (`orientation` and `q`) of the rangefinder, and the horizontal field of view (`h_fov`) are assigned that measurement value.
For example, a distance sensor measuring from 9.99° to 10.01° the measurements will get added to the bin's corresponding to 5° and 10° covering the arc from 2.5° and 12.5°

::: info
the quaternion `q` is only used if the `orientation` is set to `ROTATION_CUSTOM`.
:::

### Companion Computers

> Companion computers update the `obstacle_distance` topic using ROS2 or the [OBSTACLE_DISTANCE](https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#OBSTACLE_DISTANCE) MAVLink message.

Reviewer: @Claudio-Chies A rangefinder updated via a companion computer will publish distance sensor messages by default. Do the updates that come in via this path also get added to `obstacle_distance` or does the companion _explicitly_ have to update `obstacle_distance` ?

Author: Good question. From my understanding, any sensors connected to an onboard computer should be handled there and then published via an `obstacle_distance` message, because if we look at the topics available as an input via MicroXRCE then we only see  `/fmu/in/obstacle_distance `and no `/fmu/in/distance_sensor.`
the main use case would be if you have sensors like a depth camera which can not directly be integrated into PX4, you need the onboard computer to create a sensible obstacle_distance from this.

Now the collision_prevention does not differentiate between from where the data comes, if there is an onboarc computer which is able to publish distance_sensor messages with orientations other than down, then they will get merged into the obstacle map.
Does this answer the question?

Author: aaah, yes, it monitors the distance_sensor topic irrespective of the source, the only relevant thing is its orientation

![RViz image of collision detection using the x500_lidar_2d model in Gazebo](../../assets/simulation/gazebo/vehicles/x500_lidar_2d_viz.png)

> <!-- Code to generate the scalefactor plot

Reviewer: Thanks for adding this. Will help for next update.
